*DIDASKALIA*Vol. 2 No. 1-February 1995FEATURES: NEW ANCIENT THEATERWriting 'Greek' TragediesBy Paul WithersDepartment of ClassicsUniversity of ReadingWhiteknights, ReadingEnglandE-mail: P.S.Withers@reading.ac.uk       I began composing 'Greek' tragedies two years ago with a play about Acrisius and Perseus that failed to qualify as 'Greek' drama because the action was spread over about twenty years. Since then I have written two short tragedies, *Scylla* and *Patroclus*, and a full-length historical tragedy, *Athenians*, about the failure of the Sicilian Expedition(415-413 BC). To attempt to write a Greek tragedy and follow in the footsteps ofsuch literary giants as Sophocles, Aeschylus, and Euripides seems adaunting task to say the least. How can one even come close to emulatingsuch playwriting geniuses? But after reading other tragedies and understandingthe basics one may at least attempt to soar towards this virtual Olympus.        The two most important laws of Greek tragedy are unity of place andunity of time. By this I mean that action should take place within one dayand in one place. Of course this rule has its exceptions - one has only tothink of Aeschylus' *Eumenides* where Orestes and the Furies leave Delphiand immediately arrive in Athens. Rarely, however, is there more than onejump and most tragedies do conform to these laws.        Bearing in mind these laws one can next choose a myth around whichto construct the play. It barely needs to be said that the myth shouldinclude some tragic action - plays such as the *Helen* that have a happyending were usually written in place of a satyr-play. This tragic actionneed not include a death - Aeschylus' *Prometheus Bound* is a good exampleof a tragedy without a death. In order to choose a myth one should bear inmind themes one wishes to bring out in the play and the reason for writingthe play. This is all the more important if one wishes to write about amyth which been has used by another playwright. For example, the tragedy Ihave just begun involves three shorter tragedies describing the emotionaldestruction of Achilles, which probably was not a theme in Aeschylus' trilogy of tragedies. Thus it is unnecessary to show the physicaldestruction of Achilles, and I do not include the ransoming of Hector'sbody which Aeschylus uses in his Iliadic trilogy; in my opinion it addsnothing to the emotional destruction of Achilles.        Once one has chosen the myth one must develop the plot. One shouldattempt not to stray too far from the bounds of the myth--Hector must killPatroclus. But one can manipulate the story, as  I have done, so thatAchilles and the audience see Hector  alone as responsible for Patroclus' death. Thus the whole of Achilles' guilt and anger is thrust uponHector. However, some myths are very ambiguous. Take for example themyth of Scylla, who betrayed her city to Minos by cutting off the lockof her father's hair which magically preserved the city. I found twelve ancientauthors who alluded to the myth, and they differed often. Given thistradition I felt justified in creating a different version of the story by combining some elements from each.The resulting theme was love:Scylla loved Minos, as in most versions; her nurse, Carme (taken  from Virgil's *Ciris* ), had loved  and been spurned by Nisus;  andMinos was undertaking the siege out of love for Carme's daughter ,Britomartis. (A separate myth existed which said that Minos had at onetime loved Britomartis, but she had spurned him fleeing into the sea, fromwhere she had been saved by Artemis and become her priestess.) In my version the scorned Carme lured Minos with a tale thatBritomartis was alive and was  being held captive by Nisus. Thus a newversion of the tale emerged with two completely new elements - Carme's lovefor Nisus, and Minos' love for Britomartis, which prompted the siege.        Next comes the task of choosing the episodes. There are usually five or six for a full-length tragedy, but for my shorter tragedies I have tended touse three or four. When writing one must remember that the Greeks had attheir disposal three actors at most, thus limiting the number ofcharacters on stage at any one time and forcing a break so that an actorcan leave the stage and return as a new character. Even though little isknown of the exigencies of choral lyric I also use a developed chorus whoparticipate in the action and whose lyric passages are not merescene-dividers. The identity of the chorus is important. For mysecond tragedy,  *Patroclus*, this took some thought. Since the Greekswere fighting for a major part of the play the chorus could not be Greeksoldiers; captive Trojan soldiers would have been unsympathetic to Achilles, who would never even consider their advice; captive Trojan womencould have been used but would not have given the desired advice; Myrmidonsoldiers were ruled out because Patroclus leads them out during the play.Given these restrictions, I chose wounded Myrmidon soldiers: they could advise Achilles, who might actually heed them, and they had a legitimate reason for not fighting.         The final stage of planning is characterisation. I attempt to makemy characters human so that an audience will sympathise with them, but also heroic because they are not mere mortals. This heroic stature comes across most clearly in the diction. I believe that heroes should speak in a register befitting their status and so my diction is very formal:                ' My noble nature forces me to keep respect,                But please consider Sparta's lords'   request.  I do                Not try to trap you - noble men are born above                Deception: trust my missive.' (*Patroclus*19-22 )        Metaphor and simile are a major feature of Greek tragedies,especially those of Aeschylus, who focuses on the visual. (Typical Greekimages include the ship of state, nature images, sea images, disease andhealing,  and farming images.) Key words can be used to emphasise an idea. In Euripides' *Bacchae* the word *sophos* and its variations of meaning areused to great effect. In my *Patroclus* I used the key word *yield*, with its variety of meanings, several times within a short period:                'The Spartan plundered yields procured by me' (215)                'I yield my greaves first' (222)                'Yield? Never!  Priam, Troy shall never see me yield' (226)The absence of the word 'yield' in the context of Achilles re-entering the fray or Agamemnon admitting to Achilles that he was wrongemphasises the fact that neither man *does*  yield. I am using this wordto similar effect in the play I have just begun writing, *The Arms of Achilles*, which developed from *Patroclus*: 	'Bold Achilles, brave who gained the yields alone.'(17)       In a monotheistic, often atheistic, world it is hard to empathisewith a polytheistic society such as that of fifth-century Athens. Butsince religion played a large part in Greek drama and Greek mythology is so interlinked with the gods, an attempt to empathise must be made. Yet it is a hard line to tread: one is eager to give the gods due involvement yet reluctant to be excessive. For a 'Greek' tragedy one must connectevents that we would not with the gods:                'But then Apollo tipped the scales: Patroclus thrice                Assaulted Troy's walls; thrice Apollo hurled him off.' (371-2)One should also include appeals to the gods :                ' Approach, Hecate, scheming viper-minded queen,                Medea's mother-cousin, Circe's midnight nurse.'                (*Scylla*1-2)The gods should also have fitting epithets, which can be taken to excess inchoral lyrics:                'Ares, broker of bones,                God whose spear is battles' scales,                Who quaffs a sea of blood per day,                Who vends the souls of brayves to Dis,                Who sports beyond the bourn in death,                In slaughter, carnage, bloodshed, butch'ry, quell, and gore.'                (*Athenians* 492-497)        This quotation illustrates the particular exigencies of tragicstyle. I have attempted to get as close as possible to the basic form ofGreek tragedy. Thus I use the Greek metres--iambic trimeter and trochaictetrameter catalectic for dialogue and a variety of lyric metres. Although the metres of ancient Greek were not based on stress, but the length of the syllable, I use the same metres merely using a stressed syllable where the Greeks would have used a long syllable, and an unstressed syllable where the Greeks would have used a short syllable. Thesemetres are not easy to understand and take a lot of patience to compose--on average I complete about ten to fifteen lines per hour. For the lyricpassages (choral songs, *kommoi*, chanted anapaests) I also try torecreate the subtle change of dialect that exists in the Greek by using,  inwriting, the Middle English y-for-i substitution . Thus in the previousquotation 'braves' becomes 'brayves'.  For production I am contemplating aslight extension of the vowel sound by using a sort of iota subscript.        I have just begun writing a new tragedy, *The Arms of Achilles,*which is a trilogy of short tragedies. As is evident, though,  I still have along way to go to equal Aeschylus, Sophocles or Euripides.Paul WithersE-mail: P.S.Withers@reading.ac.uk(Paul Withers is pursuing an MA at Reading.)COPYRIGHT NOTE: Copyright remains with authors, but duereference should be made to this journal if any part of the above islater published elsewhere.*Didaskalia* Vol. 2 No.1-February 1995edited by Sallie Goetsch and Peter Tooheydidaskalia@csv.warwick.ac.ukISSN 1321-4853