*DIDASKALIA*
Vol. 2 No. 3-Winter 1995

WINDOW ON THE WORLD

This section replaces our previous 'Listings' section. Current listings can 
now be found on the Watch This Space page of our Website 
(http://www.warwick.ac.uk/didaskalia/WatchThis.html). What this section 
provides is an overview of recent and upcoming events pertaining to ancient 
theater, with occasional brief commentary contributed by someone who was 
present. Events are listed in roughly chronological order.

======================
1995 Classical Association AGM
======================

Douglas MacDowell of Glasgow ('Kleon and the sausage-seller')
discussed the portrayal of Kleon in Aristophanes' *Knights*.  He
argued that many of the accusations made against Kleon in the play
may have had some firm basis in actuality.

Andreas Fountoulakis of Manchester ('*Ousia* in Euripides,
*Hippolytus* 514 and the Greek magical papyri') began from a problem
of textual corruption in Euripides, Reiske's conjecture of *plokon*
for the mss. *logon*.  By setting the passage in the context of other
references to magic in the Greek world, Fountoulakis showed that the
conjecture makes far more sense that the manuscript reading.

Judith Mossman of Trinity College, Dublin ('Waiting for Neoptolemus:
Euripides' *Andromache*') argued for a reassessment of the
*Andromache*.  She argued that the play is bound together by the
unseen figure of Neoptolemos, who, though he appears only at the end,
and then as a corpse, is the force that drives the action of the
whole play.

Richard Seaford of Exeter ('New light on lightning: the
house-collapse in Euripides *Bacchae*') examined the destruction
Pentheus' house in the *Bacchae*.  Seaford advanced evidence that the
thunderbolt and earthquake had an important role in Dionysiac
initiation in particular, and in rite-of-passage tales in general; he
ended with an interesting parallel from the life of St. Paul.

Reported by Tony Keen
School of Greek, Roman and Semitic Studies
Queen's University of Belfast
Belfast BT7 1NN
Tel:    (01-232) 245133 ext. 3443 (evenings) (01-232) 662036
Fax:    (01-232) 315325
E-mail: akeen@clio.arts.qub.ac.uk or a.keen@v2.qub.ac.uk

=====================
Ancient Comic Opera Company 
=====================
                   
Aristophanes' *Clouds* and *Lysistrata*

Translated and adapted by A.C.O.C.'s founder and artistic director 
Greg Robic

At the Poor Alex Theatre in downtown Toronto
296 Brunswick Avenue (just west of Bloor and Spadina)

*Clouds*
Tues.-Sat. 8:00 p.m.;    Sun. 2:30 p.m.
Tickets as low as Can.$12.50 for groups
to Can.$24.50 for adults on Fri/Sat.

*Lysistrata*
Thurs. 10:30;    Fri, Sat. midnight
Can.$10.00 for students, Can.$12.50 for adults

DETAILS:

*Clouds* is a rambunctious musical comedy about 
Socrates and his fanatical students in Ancient Athens.  While 
skewering modern university education, this preposterous play 
features  irreverent parodies of popular songs from Gilbert and 
Sullivan, Mozart, Verdi, Bellini, Handel, and Slovenian polkas.  At 
the Athenian Festival of Dionysos in 423 B.C., *Clouds* won 3rd prize 
(out of 3 plays), but Robic's bold and innovative production captured the 
Best Director Award at the 1995 Hart House Drama Festival.

*Lysistrata*has the women of Athens staging a sex strike to stop the men's 
war.  Can the brave Athenian men control themselves?  Or is  peace finally 
in the cards? *Lysistrata* is a musical comedy about seduction and 
frustration, war and peace, domination and submission.  Robic shocks and 
humours in his unforgettable adaptation of Aristophanes' most popular and 
most explicit musical comedy.

WARNING:  Sexual content.  For mature audiences only.

FOR TICKETS CALL:  416-944-2329 or 1-800-689-3579 
from outside Toronto

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION:  Telephone one of the 
above numbers, or email kelman@ecf.utoronto.ca

THANKS TO OUR SPONSORS:  
Mister transmission  
Classical 96.3 FM Toronto
HMI Industries Inc. 
Filter Queen

++Reviewed in this issue++

================================
Euripides' *The Phoenecian Women* at Stratford
================================

Translated by David Thompson
Directed by Katie Mitchell
Presented by the Royal Shakespeare Company

First Performance 10 October, 1995

The Other Place
Stratford-upon-Avon
Warwickshire 
England

Tickets UK13-17

Box Office Tel. + 44 (0)1789 295623

=================
The Oxford Greek Plays
=================

A Double Bill from the Oxford University Classical Drama Society

    Euripides' *Hecuba*, presented in Greek
    *Euripides and the Women*
     (Based on a comedy by Aristophanes), presented in English

Tuesday 30th January-Saturday 3rd February

Performances 7:30 and 8:00 PM
Matinees 2:00 PM

The Oxford Playhouse
Beaumont Street
Oxford OX1 2LW

Tickets UK8, 9, 10; concessions UK5

Box Office: +44 (0)1865 798600

===================
Kaboodle in *The Bacchae*
===================

Dancing with a Tyrant

13-14 February
8:00 PM

The Theatre
2 Spring Street
Chipping Norton
Oxfordshire OX7 5NL

Tickets UK7.50, UK5.50 concessions

Box office: (01608) 642350
Fax: (01608) 642324

===========================
Ninth London Festival of Greek Drama
===========================

14 FEBRUARY- 16 MARCH 1996

Programme

Tuesday 13 February: Opening Lecture

Professor Richard Buxton:
'To Be or Not To Be: The Choices of Ajax and Oedipus'
1.15 p.m. in the Lecture Theatre, British Museum. Admission free.

Wednesday 14 to Saturday 17 February: Performance

Sophocles' *Ajax*
in the original Greek.
Presented by the Department of Classics, King's College London, 
in the New Theatre, King's College.

Performances:

Wed 14 February: 2.30 p.m. and 7.30 p.m.
Thu 15 February: 7.30 p.m.
Fri 16 February: 2.30 p.m. and 7.30 p.m.
Sat 17 February: 7.30 p.m.
Tickets UK4.00 (price includes programme) from the Business Manager,
Department of Classics, King's College, Strand, London WC2R 2LS. 
Phone 0171-873 2399 (24-hour direct line). 
Please make cheques payable to 'King's College Greek Play'.

Wednesday 14 to Saturday 17 February: Performance

Euripides' *Bacchae*
in a new English translation.
Presented by the University College London Classical Society, at the
Bloomsbury Theatre.

Performances:

Wed 14 February: 1.30 p.m. and 7.30 p.m.
Thu 15 February: 1.30 p.m. and 7.30 p.m.
Fri 16 February: 1.30 p.m. and 7.30 p.m.
Sat 17 February: 7.30 p.m.

After each matinee performance, there will be an informal discussion with
members of the cast and production team.

Tickets UK6.00 (UK4.00 children and concessions)
available from the Bloomsbury Theatre
15 Gordon Street, London WC1H 0AH 
(phone: 0171-388 8822).

Tuesday 20 February: Lecture

Dr Nick Lowe:'Telling the Story of Greek Tragedy'
1.15 p.m. in the Lecture Theatre, British Museum. Admission free.

Tuesday 27 February: Lecture

'The Most Beautiful of All Euripides' Plays: The *Andromeda* 
Reconstruction Project'
An illustrated lecture, featuring slides and performance extracts 
by Chloe Productions

1.15 p.m. in the Lecture Theatre, British Museum. Admission free.

Monday 4 to Saturday 16 March: Performance & Lectures

Euripides' *Andromeda*
a reconstruction in English.
Presented by Chloe Productions 
Tristan Bates Theatre
The Actors'Centre
Covent Garden.

Performances:

Monday 4 March: 7.30 p.m.
Tuesday 5 March: 7.30 p.m.
Thursday 7 March: 7.30 p.m.
Friday 8 March: 7.30 p.m.
Saturday 9 March: 3.00 p.m. and *7.30 p.m.
Sunday 10 March: 3.00 p.m. and *7.30 p.m.
Monday 11 March: 7.30 p.m.
Tuesday 12 March: 7.30 p.m.
Thursday 14 March: 7.30 p.m.
Friday 15 March: 7.30 p.m.
Saturday 16 March: 3.00 p.m. and *7.30 p.m.

Tickets UK6.00 (UK5.00 concessions) 

from the Box Office, 
Tristan Bates Theatre
The Actors' Centre
1a Tower Street
London WC2H 9NP. 
Telephone 0171-240 3940.

*Tickets also available for lecture + performance event at UK7.00 (UK6.00
concessions).

Special lectures

(all at 6.00 p.m. in the Tristan Bates Theatre):

Saturday 9 March
Professor Chris Collard:
'Recovering Euripides: The *Andromeda* and Other Lost Plays'

Sunday 10 March
Russell Shone:
'The Virgin and the Sea-Monster Resurrected'

Saturday 16 March
Dr Jenny March:
'The Andromeda Myth in Greek Art'

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

About the Festival

The London Festival of Greek Drama is the only event of its kind in the
world: a three-week annual season of live performances, lectures, and
workshops, committed to bringing the experience of ancient Greek drama to
the widest possible modern audience. The 1996 Festival is devoted entirely
to tragedy, with new productions of major plays by Sophocles and 
Euripides, and culminating in a unique reconstruction of one of the most 
famous of all 'lost' tragedies.

This year's opening lecture is by Professor Richard Buxton of the 
University of Bristol, one of the world's foremost Sophoclean scholars, 
and author of the acclaimed recent study of Greek myth *Imaginary Greece* 
(CUP). The lecture links to one of two new productions premiering this 
week: Sophocles' *Ajax*, probably his earliest surviving play, is a 
powerful, highly characteristic study of an extraordinary hero's self-
destruction and the subsequent struggle by family and comrades to make 
sense of his life and death. The most Homeric of surviving Greek tragedies, 
it looks simultaneously back to the *Iliad* and forward to Sophocles' later 
studies of strong, stubborn individuals perilously at odds with their world.

By contrast, Euripides' celebrated *Bacchae* was probably the last play its
author completed before his death in 406 BC: a richly troubling and
multi-layered tragedy on the violent collision of rational culture with
elemental nature in religion, mind, and society. This year the two
large-scale Festival productions have been programmed in the same week to
allow visitors from farther afield to see both plays in a single visit.
(Note that this means that the dates of the *Bacchae* are now a week earlier
than originally announced in some pre-publicity.) In a lecture at the
British Museum in the following week, Dr Nick Lowe will discuss all three
Festival plays in the light of new ways of understanding Greek tragedy's
overall history and development.

Finally, a true first: the Festival culminates in the first performed
reconstruction of a lost Greek tragedy. In the third week, an illustrated
lecture at the British Museum by Chloe Productions (of the Institute of
Classical Studies) discusses and previews the Andromeda Project --a 
venture to research and to reconstruct one of Euripides' most renowned lost 
plays. This is followed in weeks 4 and 5 by a new English-language 
production of the reconstructed *Andromeda* itself, in the Tristan Bates 
Theatre at the Actors' Centre in Covent Garden. Originally performed in 
412 BC, the *Andromeda* was one of Euripides' exciting, melodramatic 
adventure-romances, described by one ancient critic as 'the most beautiful 
of all Euripides' plays'. This unique series of performances seeks to present 
the reconstructed play before a modern audience for the very first time.

Accompanying the weekend evening performances are three special lectures 
on the *Andromeda*'s reconstruction, themes, and depiction in art: by 
Professor Chris Collard, co-author of a major new multi-volume edition of 
the remains of Euripides' lost plays; Russell Shone, the Project Director; 
and Dr Jenny March, a leading authority on Greek drama's representations 
in art.

This programme contains full details of all events in the 1996 Festival. If
you would like your name to be added to the mailing list for future years,
please e-mail n.lowe@rhbnc.ac.uk, or write to the Festival Coordinator: Dr
N.J. Lowe, Classics Department, Royal Holloway, Egham Hill, Egham, 
Surrey TW20 0EX.

The London Festival of Greek Drama gratefully acknowledges sponsorship 
from the Hellenic Society, the Classical Association, and the Institute of
Classical Studies.

Material contributed by Nick Lowe

=========
Aquila News
=========

Aquila Productions is a professional British theatre company that
specialises in touring productions of Classical plays.

THE BIRDS 1997 season

Aquila Productions will be touring a brand new production of Aristophanes'
*Birds* translated by Peter Meineck and directed by Robert Richmond in 
the spring of 1997. We are currently taking bookings for this season. 
Interested persons should contact Peter Meineck at the adddress below for 
further information.

THE ILIAD 1996

Aquila will be undertaking a short tour of *The Iliad* this March. We may 
have one slot left. Please contact the company for further information. A
finalised tour schedule will be posted shortly.

EDUCATIONAL WORK

Aquila are working with The Witte Museum in San Antonio, Texas on an
educational program based around *The Iliad* and the museum's 
'Discovering The Past' exhibit. This work is aimed at High Schools in the 
San Antonio area.

TRANSLATIONS

Peter Meineck is currently working on a translation of *The Oresteia* for
Hackett Publishing. We are planning readings of the completed text this
coming summer. We will keep you posted. There are also ambitious plans 
afoot to tour the entire *Oresteia* in 1998.

VIDEOS

The video of Aristophanes' *Wasps* is now available together with 
*Agamemnon*, *Ajax*, and *Frogs*. Further information from FCA Inc 
in New York: 102546.3466@compuserve.com or from Aquila.

Aquila Productions USA
603 Cedar Street
San Antonio TX 78210
AquilaUSA@AOL.com
Tel/Fax 210 534 6884

Material contributed by Peter Meineck

=================================
Sophocles' *Oedipus Tyrannos* in Akron, Ohio
=================================

In Greek and English
Directed by Wallace Sterling

Feb. 29-March 2, March 7-9, l996

Sandefur Theatre
Guzzetta Hall
The University of Akron
Akron, Ohio
USA

Box Office: 2l6/972-7995
Limited Seating in this Experimental Theatre Space.
For further information contact:
Wallace Sterling R1WS@vm1.cc.uakron.edu

======================
Actors of Dionysus Spring Tour
=====================

Euripides' *Trojan Women*

19th February-29th March

Includes Queen Margaret's School, Square Chapel Theatre, Merchant 
Taylors School, The Old Palace School, The King's School, Amey Hall 
(Abingdon School), Priory School, Central Newcastle High School, 
William Hulme Grammar School, Bedford High School, Benenden School, 
Queen's Hall (Queen's College, Taunton)

Public performance

March 5-7 at 8:00 PM

Rudolf Steiner Theatre
Rudolf Steiner School
35 Park Road
London NW1
(3 minutes walk from Baker Street Underground)

Tickets UK7.00; UK5.00 concessions

Box office: (0171) 723 4400

Lectures

   * 23 February (Square Chapel, Halifax)
     David Stuttard, 'From the Judgement of Paris to the Women of Troy'
   * 4 March (Amey Hall, Abingdon)
     Oswyn Murray, 'Women and War in Ancient Greece'

For further information contact:
The Actors of Dionysus
26, Charlton Street
York YO2 1JN
England
Tel/Fax (01904) 642 912

=========================
Euripides' *Medea* at Trent University
=========================

Presented by the Classics Drama Group
Directed by Martin Boyne and C. W. Marshall

Performances begin at 8:00pm
February 8-13, 1996

The Pit
Lady Eton College
Trent University
Peterborough, Ontario
Canada

For more information, contact Martin Boyne at mboyne@trentu.ca

===============================
Classical Association Annual General Meeting
===============================

11-14 April, 1996

University of Nottingham

Drama-related lectures include:

   * Dawn Churchill, 'Euripides' Hecuba and his portrayal of female
     violence'
   * Fiona McHardy, 'Violent Femmes: women and revenge in Greek 
tragedy'
   * Elizabeth Moignard, 'Masks'
   * Ian Ruffell, 'Symposia in Old Comedy'
   * Surya Shaffi, 'Bending, twisting, and reversing gender in Greek
     tragedy'
   * Larry Shenfield, 'A rhetorical puzzle: how voluntary is the sacrifice
     of Praxithea's daughter in Euripides' Erectheus?
   * Spiros Siropoulos, 'The 'prominence' of women in Athenian drama:
     Alcestis and the oikos'
   * Alan Sommerstein, 'Adolescence, ephebeia, and Athenian drama'
   * David Wiles, 'The theatricality of Hroswitha'

Conference fee: UK25, Students UK5

To book, contact Dr. J.H. Molyneux
Department of Classics
University of Nottingham
Nottingham NG7 2RD

Deadline for booking: 29 February, 1996
=========================
=========================

COPYRIGHT NOTE: Copyright remains with authors, but due
reference should be made to this journal if any part of the above is
later published elsewhere.

*Didaskalia* Vol. 2 No.3-Winter 1995
edited by Sallie Goetsch and Christopher Marshall
didaskalia@csv.warwick.ac.uk
ISSN 1321-4853


