*DIDASKALIA*
Vol. 2 No. 3-Winter 1995


THEATER REVIEWS

Timberlake Wertenbaker's *The Love of the Nightingale* 
Directed and designed by Caroline Calburn 
Performed by BA Drama students
UCT Drama Department 

16-20 May 1995

The Little Theatre's Hiddingh Hall
Hiddingh Campus
University of Cape Town

Reviewed by Margaret Mezzabotta
Department of Classics
University of Cape Town
Private Bag, Rondebosch
7700 Cape
SOUTH AFRICA
Tel. (021) 650-2607/8 Fax (021) 650-3726 
E-mail: mezza@beattie.uct.ac.za

Timberlake Wertenbaker's *The Love of the Nightingale* (first performed 
at Stratford-on-Avon in 1988) is a dramatic presentation of the myth of the 
Thracian king Tereus, his wife Procne, daughter of King Pandion of 
Athens, and her sister, Philomele. Sophocles dramatised the story in his lost 
tragedy *Tereus*, probably performed sometime between the 430's and 
416 BC. The surviving fragments are collected in S. Radt *Tragicorum 
Graecorum Fragmenta. Vol. 4: Sophocles* [Goettingen: Vandenhoeck & 
Ruprecht 1977]. They have been translated and made the basis for a 
tentative reconstruction of the plot by A. Kiso *The Lost Sophocles* [New 
York: Vantage Press, 1984] and by D.F. Sutton *The Lost Sophocles* 
Lanham : University Press of America, 1984]. It is likely that the Roman 
dramatist Accius drew on Sophocles' play for his lost tragedy *Tereus* 
(104 BC). The Sophoclean *Tereus* was probably a source for Ovid's 
treatment of the story (c.AD 8)in *Metamorphoses* 6. 422-676, which 
offers the fullest literary treatment of the myth in antiquity. 

In Ovid's version, the Thracian king Tereus routed the enemies of Athens 
and married Procne, daughter of king Pandion of Athens. Procne went to 
live in Thrace and gave birth to a son, Itys. After five years, she asked 
Tereus to bring her sister Philomele from Athens to visit her. Tereus duly 
returned to Athens, but fell in love with Philomele. He escorted her to 
Thrace, where he put ashore in a deserted spot, raped her and cut out her 
tongue when she threatened to denounce him. Leaving her incarcerated in a 
cottage, Tereus returned to Procne and pretended that Philomele was dead. 
Meanwhile, Philomele wove a tapestry depicting her rape and mutilation by 
Tereus and sent it to Procne, who understood its message and began to plot 
revenge on Tereus. Participating in the triennial rites of Dionysus she 
sought out Philomele's place of imprisonment and brought her back to 
Tereus' palace. The two sisters killed Itys, son of Procne and Tereus, and 
cooked his flesh. Procne then tricked Tereus into eating the dish she had 
prepared. At the conclusion of the meal she revealed Philomele and 
produced Itys's severed head. Tereus tried to kill the sisters but they were 
transformed into birds, a swallow and a nightingale, while he himself 
turned into a hoopoe. 

Though Wertenbaker follows Ovid's version in outline, she departs from it 
in a number of details. She introduces the device of the `play within the 
play' into the scene where Tereus falls in love with Philomele. Tereus 
observes Philomele's reactions to a performance of scenes from Euripides' 
*Hippolytus*. As the young girl thrills to the action and yearns to 
experience the love that overwhelms Phaedra, Tereus is increasingly drawn 
to her. A further innovation occurs in the means by which Tereus's crimes 
are communicated to Procne. Philomele and her attendant manipulate three 
`naked' life-sized cloth dolls, one male and two female, to act out Tereus's 
brutal acts in dumb show and express her love for her sister. Finally, 
Wertenbaker omits the episode of cannibalism.

A gifted, well-rehearsed cast of drama students performed the play in the 
University's Hiddingh Hall, using minimal scenery. The floor area at one 
end of the hall became the stage and was covered by a large expanse of 
white fabric painted with blue whorls. The wooden panelling of the walls 
formed the unchanging backdrop. A triangular piece of white cloth, 
suspended from the ceiling by ropes attached to each corner of the material, 
provided the only moveable stage- furnishing. Depending on the level to 
which it was raised or lowered and the angle at which it was hoisted, it 
functioned by turns as awning, meadow, screen, curtain, sail, pillar, tent, 
shelter, wine vat or wall. The players themselves adjusted its position, each 
modification denoting a change of scene. 

Music and pulsating drum beats announced the beginning of the play as the 
male chorus of five players , clothed in black cotton trousers and loose 
shirts, burst onto the stage, armed with staves. A narrator introduced the 
setting of Athens at war, while the chorus mimed battle scenes in slow 
motion. Against this violent background, Procne (Kira Wilkinson) and her 
younger sister, Philomele (Leanne Logan), wearing simple cream dresses, 
sat on the floor sharing their curiosity about men, sex and love. Philomele 
promised to visit Procne after her marriage, if her sister needed her. 

In the following scene, Pandion (Jonathan Acton), gave Procne in marriage 
to Tereus (Iain Harris), liberator of Athens. The chorus related that five 
years have now passed, and that Procne has given birth to a son, Itys. The 
antecedents to the main plot are thus dealt with. From this point on, the 
scene shifts rapidly between Athens, Tereus's palace in Thrace, the ship on 
which Philomele and Tereus sail to Thrace, and the lonely place in Thrace 
where Tereus keeps Philomele captive.

In Thrace, Procne expresses her loneliness to the female chorus and her 
longing for her sister's company. She begs Tereus to fetch Philomele. Back 
in Athens, Tereus prevails upon Pandion to allow Philomele to visit Thrace. 
While the two men debate the issue, Philomele gazes enthralled at scenes 
from Euripides' *Hippolytus*, in which Aphrodite fills Phaedra with love 
for Hippolytus and Phaedra struggles to resist. But Philomele, all her pent-
up emotions and desires stirred, cries out that love must not be denied. 
Tereus is increasingly drawn to her. Finally, Pandion reluctantly agrees to 
allow Philomele to travel to Thrace and entrusts her to Tereus's care. 

The next scene takes place on board ship, with the male chorus miming the 
action of rowing as they describe the route northwards to Thrace. Tereus 
watches Philomele constantly and orders the sails to be lowered as the 
journey is passing too quickly for his liking. Philomele's old slave 
attendant, rather confusingly called Niobe, (which prompted all sorts of 
misleading mythological associations), was played with great maturity and 
insight by Nina Callaghan. Niobe maintains a careful watch over her young 
charge. Her long life has schooled her to accept female powerlessness in a 
world of male domination. A rapid succession of scenes focuses alternately 
on Procne's anxious waiting in Thrace and on the building up of tensions in 
Tereus, as he edges ever closer to Philomele. He tells Philomele that Procne 
is dead, and declares his love for her. When she repulses him he reminds 
her of her enthusiastic response to the idea of love at the theatre in Athens. 
Horrified, Philomele exclaims, `Oh, my careless tongue!' Tereus rapes her 
and cuts out her tongue to silence her screams of protest, placing the blame 
for this brutal action on Philomele's own conduct because she `should have 
kept quiet'. He then keeps her in a secluded cottage, guarded by Niobe. 

Procne is told by Tereus that Philomele is dead. Five more years pass, and 
we see her in a family group with Tereus and Itys. Over the years she has 
come to terms with the loss of her sister. Then, participating in a Bacchic 
revel, Procne comes across a crowd watching `a dumb girl' performing a 
mime show with three cloth dolls that re-enacts Philomele's rape by Tereus 
and the hacking out of her tongue. Procne recognises Philomele and realises 
the truth. Reunited with each other, they join the rest of the Bacchic 
revellers in drinking.

They take hold of Itys and, concealed behind a wall, kill him. Two male 
chorus players, the one climbing on to the other's shoulders to spy on the 
women through a window in the wall, describe and comment on what the 
audience cannot see. Tereus enters and, in a moment of climactic horror, is 
shown his son's body. 

The audience is prepared for the final scene by the female chorus, who 
recount the 'strange end' of the myth and the metamorphosis of Tereus, 
Procne and Philomele into birds. Philomele, her speech restored, runs on to 
the stage carrying a large painted model of a nightingale, followed by Itys 
and a now silent Procne holding a cut-out represention of a swallow. From 
the minstrels' gallery above the stage, Niobe let handfuls of brightly-
coloured feathers flutter gently down. Philomele invites Itys to ask her 
'some more questions', thus bringing the focus back to the theme of 
questioning which characterised the sisters' opening dialogue. 

Caroline Calburn's expert direction brought out the best in the student 
actors. The choice of play was eminently suited to them, as many of the 
performers, in addition to their drama studies, were enrolled in Classical 
Culture and Ancient Mythology courses at the university. Their participation 
in *The Love of the Nightingale*, whether as performer or behind the 
scenes, showed the group the enduring capacity of mythology to illuminate 
contemporary human emotions and behaviour. Wertenbaker uses the 
Tereus/ Procne/ Philomele myth to highlight the role of language, 
particularly through questioning, in determining moral conduct, set against a 
feminist background which esposes male aggression and female 
helplessness. Though the ancient dramatisations no longer survive, 
Wertenbaker's modern version effectively communicates the continuing 
power of the myth to evoke an emotional response in its audience. 


Margaret Mezzabotta
E-mail: mezza@beattie.uct.ac.za

(Margaret Mezzabotta lectures in the Classics Department of the University 
of Cape Town.)


COPYRIGHT NOTE: Copyright remains with authors, but due
reference should be made to this journal if any part of the above is
later published elsewhere.

*Didaskalia* Vol. 2 No.3-Winter 1995
edited by Sallie Goetsch and Christopher Marshall
didaskalia@csv.warwick.ac.uk
ISSN 1321-4853


