*DIDASKALIA*
Vol. 3 No. 1-Spring/Summer 1996



THEATER REVIEWS

Laird's *Frogs*

Royal National Theatre Mobile Production presents: 
Aristophanes' *Frogs*
In a new adaptation by Fiona Laird

11-12 March
Lyric Theatre, Belfast

Director: Fiona Laird
Designer: Mark Leese
Lighting: Ian Scott
Music: Fiona Laird
Director of Movement: Jack Murphy
Cast includes Lucy Dixon, Richard Henders, Nicholas Tigg, Flo Wilson

Reviewed by Antony G. Keen
School of Greek, Roman and Semitic Studies 
The Queen's University of Belfast
Belfast
BT7 1NN
UNITED KINGDOM
E-mail: akeen@clio.arts.qub.ac.uk

*Frogs* at first glance would seem one of the harder Aristophanes plays to 
put across to a modern audience; after all, the debate between Euripides and 
Aeschylus which forms the second half of the play goes down well with 
schoolchildren and undergraduates who are familiar with those poets, but 
might well be harder to get across to an audience to whom these are just 
names. In fact, Fiona Laird's production manages to carry this scene off 
quite effectively, though it seems to have been cut down somewhat so that it 
is no longer so large a section of the play.

Unfortunately, there are a number of other sections of this production that 
don't work. Paradoxically, many of these fail because Laird has been too 
faithful to Aristophanes' text. As Kate Basset noted reviewing this 
production in *The Times* (21.2.1996), the bite of Aristophanes' political 
allusions is lost on an audience to whom those individuals are unknown, and 
the most successful productions of Aristophanes are those that are most free 
with the text; yet Laird retains many of the original references. There seems, 
however, little point in keeping a fleeting mention of the poet Morsimus, 
when even classicists know next-to-nothing about him. 

To understand the allusions to Cleophon, Theramenes and Alcibiades one 
needs to know much more about the individuals than will most members of a 
modern audience; simply including a note in the programme that they are 
politicians will not do. Likewise, Laird's version of the parabasis, though 
containing a few jokes brought about through adapting the text, largely sticks 
to the original, delivering a message that means little to a 1990s audience. 
Moreover, these references to Athenians of the fifth century seem very odd 
when spoken by actors dressed in a mish-mash of contemporary styles.

The play, both in terms of production and performances, takes a while to get 
going. It starts with Xanthias and Dionysus represented by a wind-up model 
of a man on foot and a man on a donkey, passing around a large cube that 
forms the only piece of scenery, from which characters emerge, and the 
sides of which are opened up to reveal backdrops and other representations 
of the various locations of the play (this scenery is actually quite effective, 
though one is always aware of the characters turning it around to get to the 
relevant side).

The toy is potentially hilarious, until you realise that there's no indication 
who is who, and thus the dialogue between the two characters loses some of 
its point until the toy has disappeared behind the cube and the real Dionysus 
(Richard Henders) and Xanthias (Nicholas Tigg) have entered. Dionysus is 
dressed as the last Elvis impersonator in town, with an alcoholic's red nose, 
and the accoutrements of Heracles worn on top of his yellow costume. He 
certainly looks ridiculous, but somehow not ridiculous in a funny way. 
Xanthias dressed in knitted tank-top and reminiscent of Mr Gumby (the 
character familiar to viewers of Monty Python) is rather more successful. On 
the whole, though, the entire scene with Heracles just doesn't work as well 
as it should. 

The production starts to pick up with the songs that are used in place of most 
of the choral odes and also sometimes parts of the main action. Lucy Dixon 
and Flo Wilson form the core of the Chorus, as Initiates, but for most of the 
songs they are joined by the other members of the cast. Containing some 
very carefully-rehearsed harmonies, and usually in a style to reflect the 
principal singer (so the chorus of initiates is sung in the style of a mediaeval 
madrigal, Dionysus sings doo-wop) the songs still have a tendency to retain 
the Aristophanic allusions, but at least the modern idiom is something for the 
non-specialist to get a grip on, and they certainly went down best with the 
audience the night I saw it. 

The Frog Chorus itself is represented in a manner that is not far removed 
from the manner in which Choruses used to be portrayed on stage in the 
earlier years of this century, though there are fewer of them. Dixon and 
Wilson stand at the back of the stage (though they are actually on-stage, 
where on suspects that in the Aristophanic original the Frog Chorus was 
offstage) and sing the Frogs' parts, whilst Dionysus replies while rowing 
Charon's boat; most of the words are unchanged from Aristophanes. 

The performers also seemed to warm up as they went along, particularly 
Clive Hayward; he is rather disappointing as Heracles, but gloriously kinky 
as Aeacus, dressed up in fishnet stockings and wielding various implements 
of torture with undisguised relish. In the role of Pluto's slave Hayward is 
responsible, together with Tigg as Xanthias, for a mime sequence of the two 
of them, dressed identically, eating their sandwiches; this sequence had 
nothing to do with Aristophanes, but was one of the funnier moments in the 
play. 

Finally, it all comes together in the poets' contest, with Dionysus as a 
particularly dim game-show host; the scales upon which the poets' words are 
weighed all decked out with flashing lights; and the gulf between Aeschylus 
(Hayward) and Euripides (Tigg) represented not only by making Aeschylus 
upper-class and Euripides working-class, but by giving the former a 
traditional British patriotic song, the latter a rap number. Finally the whole 
debate degenerates into a brawl until Pluto (a pre-recorded and disembodied 
Dame Judi Dench) interrupts to sort matters out -- a genuine *deus ex 
machina*.

This final main scene, followed by a coda where Xanthias and Dionysus 
hark back to the beginning of the play by arguing about the baggage, is the 
point at which one starts to get the belly-laughs that ought to be ever-present 
in a good Aristophanes production. Sadly, this production, though not 
without its strengths, has too many weaknesses.

Antony G. Keen
The Queen's University of Belfast
E-mail: akeen@clio.arts.qub.ac.uk

(Antony Keen is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in Ancient Greek History at 
the Queen's University of Belfast.)


COPYRIGHT NOTE: Copyright remains with authors, but due
reference should be made to this journal if any part of the above is
later published elsewhere.

*Didaskalia* Vol. 3 No.1-Spring/Summer 1996
edited by Sallie Goetsch and Christopher Marshall
didaskalia@csv.warwick.ac.uk
ISSN 1321-4853


