*DIDASKALIA*
Vol. 3 No. 1-Spring/Summer 1996

THEATER REVIEWS

*Antigone*   by Sophokles
translated and directed by Michael Ewans

Drama Studio
University of Newcastle, NSW, 
Australia
March 6-25, 1996

Reviewed by Liz Roberts
email c/o dmjet@cc.newcastle.edu.au

In March this year Prof. Michael Ewans directed the premiere season of his 
own new English translation of *Antigone* by Sophokles, for the 
forthcoming complete Sophokles in the Everyman Classics series. The play 
was presented in the Newcastle University Drama Studio, where a half-
size model of the ancient Greek orchestra was re-created, with the 
audience seating around three-quarters of the circle. The size of the theatre 
permitted only three tiers of seating, but the space was both 
panoramic and intimate. The *skene* consisted of a dishevelled stone building 
with central doors; only a coil of barbed wire broke the illusion of antiquity.

Despite the suggestion of the authentic Greek theatre, a decision had been 
made to use lighting, out of necessary practicalities and as an unobtrusive 
assistance to the modern audience, so accustomed to this device. The 
Director's goal seemed to be to stay within the realms of authenticity until 
it interfered with the modern audience's ability to experience 
*Antigone* in the spirit in which it was originally written.

This production was set in Sarajevo in modern times, a plausible location
for such a tragic and violent play. This context gave the modern audience a valid 
framework for the heightened emotions and passion expressed by the cast 
and the graphic bloodshed unavoidable in war (and not untypical of Prof. 
Ewans' productions). As a Muslim society, Sarajevo gave a legitimate modern 
setting to the culturally accepted powerlessness of women, which is an important 
challenge to the internal strength of  Antigone and the basis for Ismene's belief 
'that we were born female/ so we can't fight men'.

Talent was distributed evenly throughout the cast, drawn principally from 
students of the Departments of Classics and Drama, with the 
actors credibly cast in their roles. Helen Atkinson, who played the title 
role, is a petite young woman, who rose to the challenge of subverting the 
traditional stereotype of a Greek tragic heroine, without the overkill that 
would lose her the empathy of the audience. She gave an emotionally 
fearless performance that set the pitch for the other characters.

Kreon, played by Tom Bonjekovic as a middle-aged, leather-jacketed 
warlord rather than the traditional patriarch, was a strong force in the 
production; his was a passionate and enthusiastic performance. He was big 
in his reactions, giving justification to the paranoid tendencies of Kreon, 
and  maintained a strong pace throughout the whole play, with even more 
to give at the deaths of his household in the closing scene.

Lauren Eade played Ismene as a true sisterly match to Antigone. She drew 
empathy from the audience for Ismene's lack of courage but not at 
Antigone's expense.

One of the most dynamic features of the play was the work done by the 
Choros, the five councillors of the city. They were each different in height 
and build, showing a lifelike diversity of the people they represented. 
Although their routine was not always precisely executed, there was a 
uniformity of spirit as they expressed the odes and one found oneself 
waiting for their action or reappearance on stage. Christine Smith had 
choreographed a fascinating blend of dance and rhythmic movement to 
the Iranian folk music of Anouar Brahen. This, coupled with the unusual 
dynamic of having five men thus engaged, was moving and added a rich 
texture to the production.

Prof. Ewans made some changes to his translation during rehearsal, to 
give fluidity to the action. Initially one was conscious of the fact that the 
speech was different from everyday language in its beauty, but the actors 
were fluent in the script and the unfolding of the plot quickly became the 
focus. As part of the audience one found oneself easily transported into 
the story, which one may reasonably assume was a goal of Sophokles.

It is not difficult to be enthusiastic about a production so creatively 
directed. Prof. Ewans' obvious knowledge of ancient Greek theatre gave 
him a confidence to utilise totally  the benefits of the round stage in the 
'free' movement of the actors. This unselfconscious blocking left 
the actors with their backs to some of the audience, an almost inevitable 
result of playing in the round, and one which gave each audience member 
a unique perspective on the action. Ewans was able to take an almost 
mythical story and revive it with poignancy. One looks forward to 
his next venture (*Aias*, in March 1997).

A video recording of the Newcastle production of *Antigone* will be 
available, in both PAL and NTSC formats, from late June. Enquiries and 
orders can be sent to Prof. Michael Ewans, Dept of Drama, University of 
Newcastle NSW Australia. Email; mewans@mail.newcastle.edu.au

Reviewed by Liz Roberts
email c/o dmjet@cc.newcastle.edu.au

(Liz Roberts is a student at Newcastle.)

COPYRIGHT NOTE: Copyright remains with authors, but due
reference should be made to this journal if any part of the above is
later published elsewhere.

*Didaskalia* Vol. 3 No.1-Spring/Summer 1996
edited by Sallie Goetsch and Christopher Marshall
didaskalia@csv.warwick.ac.uk
ISSN 1321-4853


