*DIDASKALIA*
Vol. 3 No. 1-Spring/Summer 1996

BOOK P/REVEIWS

A Review of *Memoria del futuro: I teatri antichi greci e romani: 
censimento* and *I teatri greci e romani*


By Thomas A. Pallen
Austin Peavy State University
E-mail: PALLENT@apsu01.apsu.edu

I. 

Rossetto, Paola Ciancio, and Giuseppina Pisani Sartorio, eds. 
*Memoria del futuro: I teatri antichi greci e romani: censimento* Rome: 
*Edizione GRAF-ROMA*, [1992?]. 

This slim paperbound booklet appeared in conjunction with the 
*Esposizione Universale di Siviglia* in 1992. Translated, its title reads, 
*Memory of the Future: The Ancient Greek and Roman Theatres: Census*. 
Its 64 unnumbered pages contain four signed essays, 32 illustrations of 
ancient theatres (11 in color), and a *censimento* (census) of known 
ancient theatre sites, a total of 751 locations with recognizable ruins and 
many more with doubtful ruins or where only a literary trail indicates the 
presence of a structure. Finally, there are diagrams and explanations of the 
four basic types of ancient theatres included in the census: Greek, Roman, 
Odeon, and Gallo-Roman.

The essays, although not scholarly in the full sense of that term, offer 
interesting comments about the origin of the census project, the importance 
of ancient theatre sites, ancient performance conditions, and the significance 
of theatre structures in ancient culture. The Italian-only text renders these 
essays inaccessible to many readers. Even for me, a reader and speaker of 
Italian, this publication's most intriguing feature was the promise that 
appeared on the back cover, of 'another volume containing an ample 
photographic documentation and all of the technical characteristics, history, 
and modern usage of Greek and Roman theatres.' 

II.

Rossetto, Paola Ciancio, and Giuseppina Pisani Sartorio, eds. *Teatri Greci 
e Romani: alle origini del linguaggio rappresentato* [*Greek and Roman 
Theatres: at the Roots of Acted Language*]. 3 vols. Rome: SEAT--
Divisione STET, 1994-6. 

Unlike the earlier publication, this three-volume, large-format (31 x 26.5 
cm) set presents all of its text in four languages: Italian, French, English, 
and German. Here and there, the translations into English become 
embarrassingly inaccurate and peculiar spellings crop up now and again, 
even in pieces originally written in English. Such errors, however, though 
quite evident, amount to little in the long run.

Like the earlier single volume, this set begins with a series of essays, 
several of which also appeared in its precursor. Jean Duvignaud's 'A Sea of 
Theatres' compresses the history of theatre around the Mediterranean Sea 
into a few pages of general, rather poetically romanticized images. Maurizio 
Scapparo's 'Future Memories' describes the genesis of the census project. 
Giusto Monaco's 'In the Open Air' praises the idea of roofless 
entertainment spaces, repeating the erroneous notion that roofed theatres 
first appeared in the 17th century. In 'Future Traces,' Antonio Gala 
emphasizes the importance of ancient theatre. Edmond Frezouls' 'An 
Essential Scientific Tool' emphasizes the importance of this census. 
'Theatre and Theatres,' an introductory essay by the editors, thoroughly 
discusses the various types of structures included in the census. Hans Peter 
Isler offers a generalized but useful synthesis of the history of theatre 
buildings in 'Ancient Theatre Architecture.' 

Appropriately but abruptly, attention shifts to Vitruvius through a reprinting 
of the portion of *De architectura* specifically devoted to Greek and Roman 
theatre typology. It appears first in Latin and later in translations. These are 
separated by a series of detailed descriptions of Greek, Roman, and Gallo-
Roman theatres and Odeons, accompanied by finely rendered cut-away 
drawings of each type. Franco Corni, whose exquisite graphic images are 
known to readers of *Bell'Italia*, is responsible for these illustrations. Each 
drawing is also reduced to a line image keyed with important terminology. 
The editors have chosen, quite sensibly, given the vast variety of actual 
configurations, to present the Greek theatre here only in its late and 
extremely elaborate Hellenistic form, a structure completely unknown by 
playwrights such as Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. 

This section of the work concludes with a scholarly comment by Frank 
Sear, 'Vitruvius and the Roman Theatre.' 

The remainder of the first volume and the whole of volumes two and three 
contain the census itself, a survey in words and images of the remains, 
reports, and rumors of nearly eight hundred theatres and odeons. They are 
arranged alphabetically by modern countries (in Italian spelling) and modern 
cities or site names. The numerous full-page maps serve as little more than 
decoration; while the sites are carefully indicated and labeled, neither 
modern nor ancient borders appear. For each site, as many of the following 
items as could be ascertained are reported: 1) location by ancient and 
modern names; 2) type of structure, placement, and orientation; 3) narrative 
description of construction methods and materials, configuration, and 
distinctive features; 4) state of preservation; 5) measurements; 6) original 
capacity; 7) current utilization; 8) bibliography. In nearly every case, the 
editors have included a brief essay describing the site and its history by a 
scholar associated with it. Wherever possible, drawings, plans, or 
photographs complement the description. Although earlier scholars have 
discussed and depicted many of these sites--Margarite Bieber, Aldo Neppi-
Modona, and E. R. Fiechter, to name only a representative few--this is the 
first complete survey of all known sites. Doubtless, objections and quibbles 
will arise regarding the presentation of particular structures, but the 
achievement here lies in the collection itself. 

Lavish color reproductions of theatre-related details from ancient frescoes, 
mosaics, and vase paintings generously decorate all three volumes, their 
bindings, and the slipcase. The third volume concludes with several very 
useful indices and glossaries of theatrical and construction terms.

Although seldom mentioned in book reviews, price is a matter for note here, 
for exactly the opposite reason that might be expected. A combination of 
UNESCO support and the generosity of SEAT, the printer, makes this 
valuable work remarkably affordable. The publisher's list price in Italy is 
230,000 lire, which translates into approximately $150 in U.S. funds, for 
example. SEAT, best known as the printer of all Italian telephone 
directories, must have absorbed nearly the whole cost of producing these 
impressive volumes. Scholars and theatrophiles the world over would do 
well to express their gratitude to both SEAT and UNESCO.

Thomas A. Pallen
Austin Peavy State University
E-mail: PALLENT@apsu01.apsu.edu

(Thomas A. Pallen is a professor of theatre history at Austin Peay State 
University in Clarksville, Tennessee, U.S.A. He earned a doctoral degree 
from Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, and a masters from the 
University of Missouri.)

COPYRIGHT NOTE: Copyright remains with authors, but due
reference should be made to this journal if any part of the above is
later published elsewhere.

*Didaskalia* Vol. 3 No.1-Spring/Summer 1996
edited by Sallie Goetsch and Christopher Marshall
didaskalia@csv.warwick.ac.uk
ISSN 1321-4853


