*DIDASKALIA*
Vol. 3 No. 1-Spring/Summer 1996

THEATER REVIEWS

The Complete Plays of Seneca
Theatre des Quartiers d'Ivry 
Theatre Gerard Philipe de Saint-Denis
October 1995 to February 1996

Reviewed by Colin Mayrhofer
Classics Department
Australian National University
CANBERRA A.C.T. 0200
Colin.Mayrhofer@anu.edu.au

From October 1995 to February 1996 two theatres in the Paris region joined 
forces to present the complete plays of Seneca in public performances, five 
as fully-fledged stage productions, the remainder as rehearsed readings. 
Readings from the *Letters to Lucilius* and interviews with the artists and 
with translator Florence Dupont rounded out the project.  *Thyestes*, 
*Trojan Women*, *Agamemnon* were directed by Adel Hakim at the 
d'Ivry in October and November 1995; *Hercules Furens* and *Hercules 
on Oeta* were directed by Jean-Claude Fall at the Saint-Denis, in January 
and February 1996.

They were professional productions in theatres which receive public and 
private sponsorship to subsidise their activity. Both theatres are located in 
cultural centres which engage in a variety of educational projects in the arts. 
They are committed to encouraging the practice of the arts in their immediate 
region, but the public for these plays and others in the theatres' respective 
subscription seasons is wider, without (to the foreign observer's eye) going 
so far as to include that of the fashionable Parisian theatres. As one might 
expect, if all members of the audience who were teaching or studying 
literature in places of secondary and higher education had been asked to 
stand, perhaps half would have remained seated. Nevertheless interest in the 
project extended well beyond academic circles. The plays were well-
attended (the weekend performances were fully booked), resoundingly 
applauded in performance and reviewed positive reviews in the national 
press. I will go on to praise the performances, but here I should like to 
express my admiration of both sponsors and audience for their role in the 
project. Classicists, after all, acknowledge the importance of these bodies 
with reference to the ancient theatres. 

First, a word on the scenic space. The auditoria of the two theatres have 
steeply-raked rectilinear seating, in Ivry occupying about half of a plane 
floor, in Saint-Denis facing a raised apron which projects from a 
proscenium arch. The entrances in Ivry were necessarily from the alleys on 
either side of the seats, and the actors also used the technicians' gangway 
above the auditorium, and even a suspended lighting trolley, whereas in 
Saint-Denis the arrangements were more traditional, though, as we shall 
see, they included entrances from heaven and hell. 

All plays shared elements of scenery. In the middle of the stage there was a 
circle of what looked like black slate, and all around that, to the boundaries 
of the stage area, a layer of black grit. Underlying all the actions, the 
spectator saw a combination of cosmos and amphitheatre. At the back of the 
stage and occupying most of its width was a free-standing structure with 
three doors, true to Roman convention. In all but one of the plays this 
structure resembled a wall of partly ruined masonry bearing traces of 
Roman wall-painting; the spectator was conscious of venturing into an 
ancient and long-buried world. It was an interior wall with three open 
doorways in *Thyestes*, an exterior wall with two bricked-up doorways 
and one central closing door in *Agamemnon*. 

The Hercules plays used the same structure without particular dramatic 
references, except perhaps to signal continuity with the earlier season of 
plays. In the *Trojan Women*, the scene was a wall of burnt masonry, 
with the tomb of Hector in its middle, in form something like an erect 
sarcophagus or mummy-case, and on either side a slit in the fabric of the 
structure, through which characters could come and go inexplicably through 
the imitation masonry. This could be read as an allusion to the tendency of 
Senecan characters not to signal their movements into and out of scenic 
space. In one case the mysterious entrance and exit was used by the 
character, identified as *senex* by the MSS, who comes and goes in the 
scene of Andromache's dream.

There were also scenic elements peculiar to each play. In *Thyestes* a long 
table covered with white sheets, which could have been dining table or altar, 
occupied the centre. In *Trojan Women* a pole was planted vertically in the 
centre of the circle: perhaps a spear, perhaps an oar, certainly a token of the 
victorious invaders. The messenger at the end of the play uprooted this pole 
when he left to embark with the Greek fleet, and the messenger in 
*Agamemnon* arrived carrying the same pole. This element of continuity 
worked well with those who attended the three Atreid plays in succession 
(they were presented as a trilogy on weekends). In *Agamemnon* there 
was a barren tree in the centre, giving the stage the sense of a public place. 
In the Hercules plays, an aluminium ladder reached from the circle in the 
centre of the stage to the rear surface of the proscenium arch; that is, to the 
invisible world of the gods. The chorus of the *Oetaeus* were the only 
ones to use the ladder, but its symbolic presence was important. When a 
character on stage reproached the gods, the words were directed to the top 
of the ladder. Finally, in *Hercules Furens*, there was a manhole in the 
centre of the circle, behind the ladder. Already when the audience entered 
the auditorium, wisps of smoke were issuing from this hole, the entrance to 
the underworld.

In the matter of costumes, the production firmly chose the twentieth 
century, with the exception of the timeless rags worn by the Trojan women, 
and a few other cases. At the beginning of *Thyestes* the ghost of Tantalus 
was naked, or near enough, and covered with white powder, no doubt the 
ash of cremation. The fury who drives him was in fact threefold: three 
women in yellow cocktail dresses, with dark glasses and black scarves like 
Anita Ekberg's in Fellini's *8 1/2*; each had long artificial nails on one 
hand. The director clearly chose to avoid any obvious ancient and modern 
attributes of horror in favour of a combination both inherently interesting 
and enigmatic: something for the spectators to reflect on during their first 
encounter with the verbosity of the plays. The director reaped the rewards 
of this memorable combination in the third play, because those who had 
seen the first recognized and immediately appreciated the situation when the 
ghost of Thyestes made an unscripted later appearance, accompanied by 
furies. (1)

Agamemnon wore a bright blue uniform with gilt buttons and high boots in 
the play that bears his name. Clytaemnestra's nurse was dressed as a 
personal secretary. Clytaemnestra herself wore a dress of the same cut as 
the furies', but in  (what else?) bright red. Electra appeared in tight miniskirt 
and thick-soled black boots, her hair brutally cut and dyed, whereas her 
brother and Pylades were neatly dressed, images of innocence. In 
*Thyestes*, the hero and his children wore the ill-fitting clothes of those 
exiled by the Great Depression. Atreus in his public personality had a dark 
grey suit, and his minister was a gentleman's gentleman. Pyrrhus and his 
troops in *Trojan Women* were in today's battle dress. Astyanax wore 
expensive joggers and sweatshirt; he could have been a model in a catalogue 
of fashion for children. The only antique costumes were worn in scenes 
which the director had written off as unplayable except in the mode of 
derision, for example Strophius in silver breastplate and white military 
cloak, and Atreus, in his paroxysm of joy when he contemplates Thyestes at 
table, wearing a white kilt, naked from the waist up but covered with 
imprints of hands in blue paint. 

The end of *Agamemnon*, with the arrival of Strophius and Pylades, was 
played consciously for absurdity. Adel Hakim remarked that Seneca seems 
to have lost sight of what he was doing, in introducing characters so late in 
the play.(2)

The baring of the breast was a gesture favoured in these productions, in 
some cases to illustrate the text: the chorus, during the kommos of 
*Troades*, at Hecuba's direction; Hercules Oetaeus when he reveals the 
plague that is eating away his flesh; but also Eurybates in *Agamemnon*, 
no doubt to show the vulnerability of the Greek fleet, and Aegisthus, in a 
scene which at least one reviewer  refused to take seriously. The scene in 
question is the entrance of Aegisthus and Clytaemnestra from the house 
after the killing of Agamemnon. The raw sexual attraction which 
Clytaemnestra feels for the sadistic Aegisthus had been established in their 
previous scene. Now they were covered from head to foot in gore, and they 
drank in turn from a bottle of red wine, handling one another greedily. 
Concerning this scene, the *Le Monde* reviewer wrote, ' ... des rires 
secouent la salle. Ce n'est plus du theatre, mais du Grand-Guignol'. (3) 

It is true that the audience laughed, and the appearance of Strophius and 
Pylades described above was soon to excite further laughter. One could 
discuss the theatrical merit of Grand-Guignol, and the causes of laughter in 
a modern audience, and whether Seneca's text aimed to deter all laughter, 
and so on. But most straighforwardly one can note that in this provocative 
scene the director succeeded in replacing a number of the assumptions and 
conventions of the classic text by modern assumptions, thereby powerfully 
making sense of it. Electra, in her punk gear, conforms to our image of a 
child from a family that is, to say the least, dysfunctional. The gestures and 
intonations of her elders established their role as incompetent and dangerous 
parents. She had her own way of protecting herself and, above all, her little 
brother, from their repressive violence. 

The director used the same approach elsewhere with less provocation in the 
Andromache-Ulixes scene of *Trojan Women*. This is a prime example of 
metatheatre in Seneca: both characters have a role to play so as to deceive 
the other and win the contest over Astyanax's life. Ulixes is bound to win in 
the end, but Andromache resists with the tenacity of a mother, until he finds 
the chink in her defence, which is her fidelity to the dead Hector. The scene 
is composed to some extent of exchanges between the two, but even more, 
of monologues to which the other character does not have access. The 
director has to create a scenic convention which not only permits these 
asides but allows them their full emotional force. Hakim used a powerful 
spotlight, mounted on a stand downstage right - near the side entrance by 
which characters arrived from the fleet. Ulixes manipulated this spot in the 
manner of a brutal interrogator to extract answers from Andromache, and it 
served also to create areas of light and shade which the actors used like 
stages within the stage for their monologues. 

This was good theatre in itself, but the scene succeeded at a deeper level as 
well in bringing the text to life. The text presents the capitulation of 
Andromache in paradoxical terms: in the hope of saving her son's life she 
hides him in the place of death; finally she prefers to save her husband's 
tomb, so her son must return to the world of the living and die, and so on 
(*Trojan Women*, 599ff., 642ff.). A reader may be inclined to dismiss this 
as typical Seneca, style without substance. But if it is embodied on stage, 
with adequate acting and direction, and in this production they were more 
than adequate, it is totally convincing. Andromache was terrified and 
confused by the interrogation, and when forced to choose between son and 
husband, she chose the latter, not reflecting that the surrender of her son 
would in no way prevent the Greeks from destroying Hector's tomb if they 
so decided. 

Worse was to come. Astyanax understood that his mother had betrayed 
him, and she had to leave him for ever with this understanding. She tried to 
give him a view of himself in relation to his parents which would make the 
separation more tolerable: 'show what kind of stuff you are made of' (*i 
uade liber*, 791). But Astyanax is only a child, that kind of talk was 
meaningless for him; hence his one utterance, 'have pity, mother' 
(*miserere mater*, 792). That cry was most probably to be delivered by a 
young actor in the ancient theatre as it was in this modern theatre. It reminds 
the reader of the need to imagine the sheer visceral impact of an attractive 
child (see on costume above) in a threatening situation on stage. 

Florence Dupont's translation tends to emphasise the metatheatrical side of 
Seneca's text, and in Hakim's production the actors made much of these 
cues, inviting the audience with gestures to attend to the spectacle of a 
narrated or acted event.  At the beginning of the banqueting scene in 
*Thyestes*, Atreus glories in the success of his revenge, pointing to  his 
brother who has eaten his own children's flesh (917-9). Thyestes, still at 
table, sings a *canticum*, after which Atreus addresses him, and their 
dialogue ensues. How is one to imagine this in spatial terms? 

'Eavesdropping' in its normal sense can not apply to Atreus inside his own 
palace; should we imagine an architecture in which the host can spy on his 
guests? In this production, the stage was in semi-darkness at the beginning 
of the scene, after the stasimon. The chorus and the messenger who in the 
previous scene narrated the sacrifices preliminary to the banquet took their 
places on benches along the side walls of the stage. The three furies, whom 
we recognized from the prologue, set the table, lit by a single low spot 
which gave them menacing shadows. Thyestes arrived and sat at his place. 
Then Atreus entered, brightly lit, dressed as described above, his hands 
covered with green paint which he smeared on his face. He is literally not in 
the same world as Thyestes (885-6), and there is no incongruity in his 
speaking without being heard. During Thyestes's song, the actor playing 
Atreus left the stage, cleaned his face and hands, and reappeared in the dark 
suit of King Atreus to join his brother at table. 

In this banquet scene the role of Thyestes is, if not easy, at least replete with 
corporeal cues. Apart from anything else, the actor can clutch his belly and 
gag. It is the role of Atreus which is difficult to imagine: what does he do all 
this time? The solution adopted here was to give him a coldly psychotic 
character (in his dark-suited phase); he looked on his brother's pain with 
detachment. But why did Thyestes content himself with reproaches from a 
distance? An obvious solution, which would be true to the conditions of the 
ancient theatre too, would be to have Atreus hedged about by guards. But in 
this interpretation the princes needed to be alone. It was a family affair, 
something that brothers had to settle between themselves. And indeed 
ultimately they settled it with blows. Atreus's taunt that Thyestes would 
have done likewise, given the chance (1104ff.), was embodied in the 
ending of the play, with the two of them on the ground wrapped in the 
tablecloth, an indiscriminate mass of wrestling limbs, repeating for ever the 
last exchange (1110-2).

What about the heads and hands of the children, which Atreus reveals to 
Thyestes just before revealing that Thyestes has already eaten of their flesh? 
To know how it was done is to situate the dramatic method to some degree: 
the hideoous remains were under the table, hidden by the tablecloth which 
reached to the ground. The actors naturally took their seats facing the 
audience across the table, and so Atreus could lift up his side of the cloth 
and show the remains to his brother without the audience needing to see 
anything.

The Hercules plays seem to the reader to pose the problem of Seneca's 
dramaturgy in an acute form, as they contain violent, spectacular action, 
separated by long passages of pathetic monologue. Jean-Claude Fall made 
use of the technology of the modern theatre in certain scenes of *Hercules 
Furens*. He used a powerful low-frequency sound to prepare the audience 
for impending disaster, and smoke and a ball of fire issued from the 
underworld ahead of Hercules and his companions, who were expelled 
violently upwards from the hole in the ground. Hercules' killing of his 
children and wife while driven mad by Juno was enacted on a darkened 
stage under stroboscopic light, a symbol of his altered perception, and when 
normal light was restored, the tableau of the corpses was mirrored in a life-
size model fixed high up on the back wall of the stage, already transported 
to the sky, as it were. It was these corpses that Hercules saw when he 
emerged from the sleep into which he falls after his fit of madness. 

This implies that the actors playing wife and children had left the stage in the 
meantime. This transition was perhaps the dramatic climax of the 
production, and it deserves a detailed description. The first child fled out of 
view followed by Hercules, who killed him off stage. The second child fled 
into the house; Hercules pursued him, and reentered with the lifeless body, 
an effigy, in his hand, and hurled it off stage. Megara and her infant were 
killed on stage, and there they lay. When the normal light was restored, 
with Hercules sleeping supine near centre stage, the two children entered, 
clothed in black, with lighted candles, and joined their mother. She sat up  
and accepted a candle, which she lit from theirs, and then solemnly one by 
one they went down into the underworld, a literal interpretation of the text 
(1129ff.), and probably an allusion to the ending of Peter Brook's 
*Mahabharata*. The extinguishing of the lights during the Orpheus chorus 
(524ff.) (intended to help the audience imagine the underworld) provided 
dramatic preparation for this scene, and prominence was given to the words 
of the chorus at 854ff., which evoke infants in the underworld, for whom 
alone there are torches to lessen their fear of the dark. 

The influence of Peter Brook could be suspected also in the mise en scene 
of the *Oetaeus*. I refer to a use of techniques far removed from sound and 
lighting effects: rough theatre, the handling by actors of simple objects in a 
significant way. The chorus of Oechalian captives, spoken by one woman 
in this production, used the grit on the ground and a few tiny ceramic 
figures to illustrate the capture of their city by Hercules. Before the entrance 
of Deianira's nurse, a large square of cloth was thrown down by an unseen 
hand from the top of the ladder. The nurse unfolded this, and it became the 
women's confidential space within which they debated how she should 
react to Heracles' infidelity. 

When Deianira resolved to regain her husband's love by sending him a tunic 
daubed with the centaur's blood, the actor playing Deianira executed the 
daubing of the tunic in a fully mimetic fashion, using a pad of wool. A 
stasimon follows this scene, and in the course of it the chorus narrates the 
story of Icarus. To illustrate the heat of the sun which melted the wax of his 
wings, they set fire to this same pad of wool. 

In somewhat the same spirit Philoctetes, when he described the cremation of 
Hercules, spilled matches about him, which at the appropriate moment he 
gathered in a heap and lit. But to return for a moment to the Deianira scene: 
after the preparation of the tunic, she lay on the square of cloth as if asleep. 
The chorus, during which the wool burned, was apparently to be read as 
Deianira's dream. She awoke in a state of agitation and described to the 
nurse the supernatural events which she had seen. This was an interesting 
re-creation of the conventions of the classical text, in a manner which 
reminds one of Medea's dream in Pasolini's film of that name. 

Deianira's speech following Hyllus' narration of the agony of his father was 
another example of coping with the conventions of the text. It is formally 
directed to her inner self, not to the judgement of the world around her, and 
the actor in delivering it remained motionless except for her eyes, using a 
limited range of inflection in her voice. In the stichomythia which follows 
the pair of long speeches, she reverted to a normal style of delivery.

Both directors faced the challenge presented by Seneca's dramas quite 
simply, by getting from their company of actors performances that, with 
their intelligence, energy and variety, made the words live. The biggest task 
was the Hercules parts, played by a giant of a man, Moise Gabelus. 
Laurence Roy, the mature woman actor who played Clytemnestra and Juno, 
was a match for her roles, and among the men who played various parts 
large and small, including the daunting messenger speeches David Gouhier 
and Francois Raffenaud were remarkable. The choruses were spoken, 
usually turn and turn about by two actors. The text was in general 
performed in full and faithfully, but not sedulously. In particular, Jean-
Claude Fall was inspired by the uncertainty which exists in the transmitted 
texts over the assignation of speeches to different characters to redress 
imbalances in the casting: thus Hercules returned from the underworld with 
Theseus and not Cerberus but Peirithous, who shared some of the speeches 
of Theseus; Lichas spoke the epilogue of *Hercules Oetaeus*. A

The productions had a place for provocation and absurdity. Gouhier and 
Raffenaud named played the chorus in *Hercules on Oeta*. They were 
hardly the Aetolian women demanded by the text, though they did wear 
long dresses. They made their entrance down the ladder to the stage, and as 
visitors to the scene, commented eagerly on the action like two talking heads 
on television who have often performed together. Sporting commentators? 
Rather personalities from late-night French television, matching wits over 
literature and philosophy. 

The publicity claimed that the project was the first of its kind in France, a 
statement which probably erred on the side of modesty. In any case the 
project was remarkable for both its conception and its execution, and though 
it generated spectacles of a very different kind from Mnouchkine's *Les 
Atrides*, it deserves the same order of attention from students of classical 
drama. 

(1) In an interview on radio, France Culture, Mardis du thŽ‰tre, 'Seneque 
ou les enfers revisites', Tuesday 12 December 1995, with Florence Dupont 
and the two directors of the Seneca season, the following explanation was 
given: the furies in *Thyestes* are dressed like Anita Ekberg because the 
fury is the goddess of the house, not an Olympian goddess, and the director 
had tried to imagine a goddess such as might inhabit a house. He chose the 
idea of a photograph of a famous person from a movie magazine; something 
private and yet widespread in the community.

(2) Taken from the same radio interview.

(3) Brigitte Salino, Review of *Agamemnon*, *Le Monde*, 21.10.95

Colin Mayrhofer
Australian National University
Colin.Mayrhofer@anu.edu.au

(Colin Mayrhofer's course on the ancient Greek and Roman theatres at 
ANU is aimed at a mixed public of Classics and Drama students, using 
translated texts. It has a component of practical work in acting and 
directing scenes from the classics.)

COPYRIGHT NOTE: Copyright remains with authors, but due
reference should be made to this journal if any part of the above is
later published elsewhere.

*Didaskalia* Vol. 3 No.1-Spring/Summer 1996
edited by Sallie Goetsch and Christopher Marshall
didaskalia@csv.warwick.ac.uk
ISSN 1321-4853


